Hey, Brian. Hey, YouTube. How's it going?
Good.
Good, good. Good to be here with everyone. You ready to kick us off?
Yeah.
Hello, and welcome to Python Bytes, where we deliver Python news and headlines directly to
your earbuds. This is episode 468, recorded February 2nd, 2026. I'm Michael Kennedy.
And I'm Brian Akin.
This episode is brought to you by us.
Brian's books, his new Lean TDD book,
which you can get right now and is in development,
but almost done.
Yes.
He's going to be done this week, folks.
Don't worry about it.
So my Python and production book has been going strong as well.
That's a really fun one.
And, of course, our courses.
All the links for those things are in the show notes.
Follow us on the socials.
Sign up for the newsletter.
We don't spam you.
We just send you updates about the episodes, extra information, more links, that kind of thing,
as well as a periodic announcement of like, hey, we've got a new course or a new book or whatever it is we're up to.
Things like that.
But we don't give it away.
We don't sell it.
Things like that.
And with that, like a bolt of lightning striking out of the blue, what do we got?
Well, we've got Django Bolt.
So Django Bolt is actually, I learned about Django Bolt because I was looking at the Django Chat website,
or the django chat and they had a um they had an episode building a django api framework faster
than fast api which of course i was interested in and so this is this episode actually discusses um
django bolt and um uh django bolt uh is a is a rust powered behind the scenes but it's inspired it's
a so it's like fast um like we already have django rest framework and there's django ninja
but this is along those lines of trying to get an API framework for Django.
The inspiration is kind of interesting.
I think down near the bottom, there's inspired by Django REST framework,
FastAPI, Lightstar, and Robin.
Apparently, some of the Rust Python,
the integrating rest and python it was inspired by some of the robin project i don't know anything
about robin actually so um but uh so interesting different take on apis for um uh for django i was
in one of the things that was really interesting especially in the discussion on the podcast
was um the the uh the timing of it trying to figure out um how fast things are and there's
You know, there's issues with that,
but apparently he used like a ton of graphs,
a ton of charts, so you can look at what's going on.
Also, in the act of doing that,
realize that the Django, you know,
even Django REST framework,
if you configure things in a certain way,
you can do off-the-shelf things and get it pretty fast anyway.
But so this is an interesting take.
So there's a bunch of links we're going to link to.
There's the Jenga Bolt repository.
The documentation is set up and it's pretty good.
Oh, I should back up.
There's a little warning in it that it's still in progress.
It's under active development.
So be aware of that.
Okay.
Then there's the podcast episode.
And then just recently somebody came out with a video walking through using Django Bolt, which is an interesting discussion.
And I actually just watched the first part of it.
The first part of it actually talks about some of the ecosystem around APIs in Django and then walking through a little bit of it.
So pretty interesting take on APIs.
yeah that is super interesting
I've been looking at Django Bolt as well
not because I plan to use it
because my websites are not in Django
but it's got some really interesting
ideas out there
also note on the performance thing
do your own performance testing
I think it's more importantly
people should think about this
side by side
like 3 or 4 weeks ago
when I did my Python numbers, everyone should know.
Every Python developer should know.
People said, well, you did this on an M4 Pro CPU,
and it's not gonna be the same
when you run it on a $5 crappy server in the cloud.
I'm like, true.
But if I run it on a $5 server,
the people go, well, it doesn't run,
that's not comparable to my high-end server or whatever, right?
Like, it's more like, okay, this one is relative to that.
This is like 2x of that other one or something, right?
So just keep that in mind, right?
Yeah, I mean...
I don't know what these numbers are tested on.
Right, but also, I mean, as long as the numbers are relatively tested,
you're doing A and B on the same hardware.
Now, there might be differences in the behind the CPython implementation
based on different hardware
and to the point where one technique will work better on some platform than another but i don't
think a lot of people are thinking in the dirt that much but yeah anyway yeah yeah uh one quick
bit of real time follow-up from simposts in the audience my first job was in django i always loved
django rm plus migrations framework and jango bolt connects orm with fast async stuff which is really
cool indeed yeah it did seem like a neat a neat project yeah it'll be something to watch indeed
but did he mention async? What if you had leaks in your async code? So I want to talk about this
thing called PyLeak. So PyLeak detects leaked async tasks, threads, and event loop blocking.
So that's not exactly a leak, but it's kind of a leak. So it's non-async code leaking into async
sections. When I first saw this, I thought it was a memory diagnosing thing. But what it's for is
diagnosing async tasks that if you've ever seen like this, this task was not awaited or something
like that. And it's got a really nice programming model. But this is this something that certainly
can happen I will tell you if you run the ty or the pyrefly typing integration with your editor
and maybe pycharm I don't think pycharm does this but those two will put pycharm will detect that
the stuff is not being treated right but the others do inline type overlays so you'll have like x equals
some function call and you think x is an integer if it says x and then in little gray like it's not
really in the code but it's putting there colon coroutine of something something int you're like
oh i forgot to await that because it's coming back as the unexecuted coroutine not um the number
the integer right that it's easy to do if you're writing regular async code but it's really easy
to do if what you're doing is converting a synchronous program to an async program.
Because every call site of every function is synchronous, and then you go make those
functions asynchronous, and then you try to go back and fix them everywhere you called
them.
It's not a syntax or a runtime error, usually, a lot of times, to actually not call that.
It'll just run.
So for example, you have x, let's say x equals some function call.
It normally gives you back a number.
You want to make sure it's not zero.
So you'd say if x, if not x or if x, something like that, right?
Well, when it's a coroutine, your if x still runs.
It's just always true.
And things like that, right?
Because is the coroutine falsy?
No.
There's only like five or six things in Python that are falsy.
And coroutine is not.
So it's true.
Keep going.
It's really sketch.
so those are super hard to catch and this is the kind of thing that theoretically will catch it
so pretty neat anyway uh it doesn't all it depends how you start it i believe right you've got to do
like a create task where the task has to be running if you just create a coroutine and
don't do anything with it it probably still won't catch it just to be clear anyway so here's how it
works you can say create um uh context manager with block in async with block and you say
with no task links, leaks, and you run some code.
And here's a function call to create a task
that is never awaited.
You wait long enough for that to come into existence
and you're going to get an error, right?
Or this also works for threads.
Just create a thread and never wait for it to stop.
So the context here is within this block of code,
I might be starting threads,
but they should all be done by the time we leave.
So this is pretty interesting.
And then another one that's common is you can do things
that have async counterparts, but the older way to do them
would block the async I/O thread.
And that's really bad because you
want to spend as little time blocking that as possible
because there's only one thread that does all the async work.
So if you're doing fast API or whatever, one thread.
Don't block it, depending on how you set up your server,
but generally.
So if you had old code that said time.sleep,
and then you convert that to async,
this should be an await async.io.sleep,
so that it just lets the loop go for half a second,
rather than block the entire program.
So you can say with no event loop blocking.
So those are the three types of tests.
So you can do it with context managers, which is pretty cool.
You can also do it with decorators, put them on a function,
no thread leaks, no task leaks, and so on.
And you get errors like leaked task 2 or whatever.
It's pretty descriptive, shows you where it's called and so on.
Another one, though, you'll probably like this, Brian.
Scrolling down a bunch of examples.
Da, da, da, da, da, da.
But where are you?
They also have a PyTest plugin for it.
So you can come and say, PyTest mark async IO,
and then run with no event loop blocking in there,
which is pretty nice.
It's maybe not exactly what I was looking for, is it?
There we go.
The PyTest plugin.
So then you can set it up as a marker with no leaks
and things like that.
Cool.
Yeah.
Anyway, yeah, if you're doing anything with async programming,
it might be worth throwing this on just to see what's going on.
I don't think I would leave this on all the time.
But having the unit test for it, good.
And maybe if you're doing conversions, like I said,
it's especially error-prone to go from converting synchronous code
to asynchronous code because it's so easy to overlook converting one bit here or there.
So this would ideally catch it.
Yeah, I'm not sure.
It'd be one of those things of also timing it.
During development, if you had this on to make sure things are cool
in your synchronous part or async part.
And then how much slower is it or how much faster is it if you take that out
if there's not much of a difference?
Yeah, maybe leave it.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
Well, more Django?
Yeah, I've actually been thinking about Django a lot lately.
So I've got a few articles.
I just want to kind of run through a few of them that I ran across.
I don't have much to say about either one of them,
so I thought I'd combine them into one topic.
So first off, we have from Paul Taylor,
migrating from Celery to Django Tasks.
And I know Django Tasks,
I can't remember if it was just in this recent release.
I think so.
But they're a newish thing.
So you might have some code around that you're a project that's using Celery already, and you want to use Django tasks instead.
So walking through some of the differences and what to watch out for, the different settings.
And it made me want to play with it a little bit because apparently Django tasks has, well, if you combine it with cron task,
you can have tasks run at certain intervals,
which is kind of fun.
That's neat.
You probably can do that with Celery too.
Yeah, but how many servers do you want?
This is like if your web app is running,
it's happening versus are the servers talking to each other?
Yeah.
And then next article, this is from Julia Evans,
and she brought us all those cool zines about programming
and GitHub and all that stuff.
She wrote some notes on starting to use Django.
And one of the things I just like about this
is she's an experienced developer.
You probably are already familiar with Julia Evans.
But one of her comments about Django
is it's less magic than Rails.
And one of the things about that
isn't just a style thing.
It's when you leave a project
and come back a few months later,
Can you pick it up and understand where things are?
And just her commentary is just Django makes it more obvious.
If you want to look for your views, they're in views.py, things like that.
The built-in admin, of course, is nice.
And the ORM, everybody loves the ORM.
Or if you like the ORM, you love it, probably.
automatic migrations.
That's a really cool built-in thing of Django.
Good docs.
And this is like the third one.
Oh, built-in email was as neat.
I haven't tried to use email with Django,
but it's on my to-do list.
Apparently, it's not that difficult.
So that's cool.
One of the things is that she's said
that she's been using SQLite for Django in production and followed these instructions.
And these instructions is the last article I want to talk about, which is the definitive
guide to using Django with SQLite in production. And I just skimmed this, but it goes through
how to set up databases and cache and all that stuff. I'm going to drop down to the conclusion.
there's quite a bit here and but the conclusion says um that is reduced complexity um it still
looks kind of complex to convert to me but um but maybe it's less complex than keeping a sqlite
or a postgres database around or something so yeah maybe backup is copy the file that's nice
yeah so um anyway um and i can't remember which article was in there was a discussion around
having
in one of these Django articles about having
tasks be stored in
the database
itself, which is interesting.
I didn't know you could do that.
So yeah,
fun with Django.
Yeah, very cool. I mean, in a sense, we're using
SQLite in production.
Python Bytes has a bunch of
caching through disk cache,
and disk cache is really just a
fancy front end to SQLite.
So if that thing keeps hanging together, I guess it works.
No, it's good.
It's good.
So I want to talk about Datastar.
So Datastar is a cool framework.
I would, this is not quite the exact right mental model for thinking about it,
but it's kind of the spiritual successor to HTMX, I think.
so the folks behind data star they came from being contributors to the HTM X side
and being big fans of it so for those of you who don't know HTM X super cool
library you it kind of extends the HTML markup to do more things so instead of
just saying here's a button you could say here's a button and on click I want you
to call this thing on the server.
And when it comes back, I want you
to replace this part of the page with what came back
from the server and so on.
And HTMX is great, but HTMX only does that sort of local server
communication, right?
So it might update some section.
But what if when that part updates,
another part of the page updates?
And it gets a little bit more complicated.
So what people have done is they paired HTMX with AlpineJS
and other things.
But AlpineJS has its sort of truth for what the data is.
And then HTMX has the DOM and the server.
And it's a little bit your job to juggle the go-between
for these libraries, which is not ideal.
So Datastar takes this idea and says, what
if the server was the source of truth?
What if we could have multiple parts of the page update
In kind of a HTMX way, you say like, if you interact with this,
you know, like click on this element,
I want you to get this stuff from the server.
And it sends back the page.
And very much like PyView, which we talked about previously,
it will take what comes back from the server,
diff it and figure out, well, this section with this ID
is going to be updated over here,
and some other part is going to be updated with this
because that ID part in the thing that came back matches over there.
And it's got this really nice way to sort of be a little more holistic,
but still do HTMX-like attributes with server-sent event things going on.
So in a way, it's like PyView.
But what's really different about this, two things.
First is it's not a web framework.
Like, PyView is a web framework.
Like, Django is a web framework.
Like, Flask is a web framework.
This is purely a JavaScript library that talks to the server.
It basically handles everything on the front end.
It's only 11K, too, by the way, so it's incredibly small.
And it does what AlpineJS does.
It has sort of a data binding thing.
And the server can say, I know you have a variable called username.
And if I update username on the server,
it will automatically change the page everywhere username is used.
So it has these things called signals as well.
Pretty neat library, like this star field here.
see how if if you go to the website it's following my mouse around you can make it go faster or
slower it feels like you're in Star Wars which is pretty cool but all of that is being driven by
server set events off of the server which is pretty neat there's a bunch of cool examples so you go
to the examples page of it as zoom back a bit they also have this really fun video so you should
definitely watch the video but let me show you an example so there's a bunch of these examples and
if i open up two of these and put them side by side i can use the new vivaldi thing or i can
tile them together and if i get them to zoom the same size so if you come over here you can just
type and put if you put these two side by side you can say record podcast and boom they're both going
I don't know this one is, I'm going to finish that one.
I'm going to finish that.
Let's show only the completed ones.
Oh, wow.
And that happens to be on my same machine,
but really they could be anywhere.
There's a really bunch of interesting performance things
around with Datastar.
So if you kind of like HTMX, but you're like,
ah, but it's a little bit not quite enough
for what I need to do, check this out.
It's a really cool thing.
And this episode with the Datastar team
is coming out on Talk Python this week.
I wanted to feature Datastar on the show sooner,
but then when I knew I was going to have them on Talk Python,
I was like, well, let me just wait until I get that episode recorded.
People who are more interested can listen to that as well.
So that's coming out.
Plus a couple bonuses on this.
One, the website, just the retro look of it looks awesome.
It's great, isn't it?
everything and that they use the um the term hypermedia kind of love that back yeah i do to
the origins so yeah yeah for sure and there's also this really nice article by um chris may
who is a very big fan of htmax gave some a django you know flask on talk on it um
and basically went through and said why why do i think i'm using datastar these days so
So really nice example, but got some Python examples.
There's a Python SDK that you can bring in.
So if you are using Flask, use the SDK.
If you're using FastAPI, use the SDK or whatever.
But yeah, super neat.
OK, cool.
All right.
That's it for all of our topics, isn't it?
Yeah.
What?
Got anything out there you want to cover?
Any extras?
Okay, so yeah, a couple of extras.
Let's see, I'm all zoomed out.
So I did bring up Django chat before.
I was lucky enough to be asked to be on the show as well.
So I was talking about Lean TDD
and a lot of other stuff on the Django chat podcast.
One of the things they asked me is about the trends
in web frameworks for Python.
And I'm like, man, I'm the wrong guy to ask about that.
But yeah, sure.
OK.
You mean the ones that run on the hardware that control the Wi-Fi signals?
Yeah.
So anyway, so I am working a little bit at Django lately.
But I'm by no means a Django expert.
But we did get into the Lean TDD and inverting the testing pyramid a little bit.
One of the things I love about this, and it was really fun, because Carlton, when I brought up the fact,
brought up some reasons to shy away from unit tests as much.
Carlton kind of got his feathers ruffled,
and we walked through some of the good aspects of unit tests
and where you might want to keep them, where you might want to ditch them.
So that was fun.
The next extra is that I did notice that the PEP 686,
making UTF-8 mode the default is now, or maybe it was.
Maybe it was a while ago.
But anyway, I just noticed that it was finals.
If we haven't covered it already, it's finalized.
And in 3.15, it'll be there.
So that's good.
I think that's all my interest.
This is a really old request, but it didn't get until next year, right?
3.15.
So this was originally started in 2022.
Yeah.
But it's not yet in Python, right?
It's 3.15, as you point out.
Yeah, I'm looking forward to having the default be just UTF-8.
Yeah, I mean, if you're going to have a default,
let's pick the one that is mostly used
and supports all the different languages and emojis
because it's important to have emojis.
Yeah.
Before we move on, I do have, I guess, a way side tangent topic.
Kind of the sci-fi-ness of Datastar reminded me that recently I remembered the cheesy 80s movie
that reminded me of Tesla's Cybertrucks.
And the cheesy movie was called Megaforce, and it's from 81.
Did you ever see Megaforce?
I have somehow missed this cultural phenomenon.
Well, you're probably well off because Rotten Tomatoes gives it a 6%.
And the reason why I think about it when I see Teslas is because of these trucks.
So these tanks in there in the Megaforce kind of remind me of, well, just sort of the angles and stuff kind of remind me of Cybertron.
They do have that, don't they?
Incredible.
Those are my extras.
I love that you're hopeless.
On Blu-ray.
wow that's is that a song I don't know it seems like it comes from the movie but I don't know
look at the shot oh my gosh even the closer it's so bad cyber truck looking
I want one of these though but yeah so you have any extra I this this is completely escaped me
This is incredible.
Yes, I have extras.
So first of all, Brayson Daniel, who's been on the show a long time ago
when we were having guests, wrote an article about whether,
well, has a project and a theory about whether LLMs think
or if they're just pure statistics.
And as a good data scientist, created this project,
Which here, yes.
And it's a literature review about whether machines think or don't think.
And so now it's got an LLM analyzing all the papers on whether LLMs think or don't think.
And you can say, so the premise is that they do not, right?
So there's 97 papers that support it, but 13 that challenge it.
And if you go and look at them, you can actually hover over these.
And it's just a beautiful website.
So one, I think it's an interesting, timely topic.
But two, it's just a really neat way to present information.
Yeah.
So well done, Preston.
Also, came across a new Mastodon app called IceCubes.
And it's free and open source if you're a Mac person, at least.
So I don't know.
I've been playing with this.
It looks nice.
I really like it.
And having it open source, you know, we just, I don't know how you feel about this, Brian,
but I just don't usually connect open source and Mac apps, or sorry, iOS apps.
This is on both, but really I don't think, like phone apps and open source,
I don't think about those being, I know there are some out there, but it's way less common.
Yeah, anyway, I just want to give it a shout out.
I thought it was cool.
I ran across it looking into something else.
Yeah, because don't you have to pay to be...
Yeah, I pay $100 a year
so I get the privilege to publish to Apple.
So I pay $100 a year for the privilege
to make Apple's products more valuable to them.
It's amazing.
Yeah, I was just thinking that
that might be one of the reasons
why we don't see a lot of open source.
Yeah, exactly.
And then whose job is it to be in charge of it
because it's not as easy to release
because it's got to go through somebody's account.
It's just not that common, and I ran across this,
and I thought it was really cool.
So I'm using this for my Mastodoning.
However, Mona, the one I was using before,
has a really nice feature that if you write a thread too long,
it'll split it into a series like 1 of 3, 2 of 3, 3 of 3 automatically,
and this one doesn't have that.
But we could open a PR. How's that?
Yeah.
All right, carrying on.
Remember we talked about RUMDL, R-U-M-D-L,
which is a Rust-based markdown formatter in Linter?
Yeah.
Which is really nice.
We've both been using it for various things.
Well, there's now a RUMDL IntelliJ plugin,
so most of the people listening will care about that in terms of PyCharm.
But if you want to have that built right into your editor
and you're using PyCharm, you can install the plugin,
And off it goes.
Yeah.
Okay.
And then really quickly,
the last time I talked about how curl,
like you mentioned something about AI frustration
with some project or whatever.
And I pointed out curl.
So I'm linking to Ars Technica article that says,
overrun by AI slop,
curl scraps bug bounties
to ensure that they keep their mental health intact.
So there was the PRs,
the PRs that were like thousands of lines long
and they were just kind of really messy
and people were like, we're not accepting that.
I don't remember what project that was.
It's been a long time.
It's been a week.
But I said that Curl's doing the same thing.
It's not exactly the same thing.
What they're doing is they had a bug bounty program.
Like, hey, well, we'll pay you $1,000
if you find a memory overflow or something like that.
Well, a bunch of people were just turning
Claude code or something loose on it.
They say, find all the bugs,
and then they were submitting whatever Claude code told them.
And apparently, a lot of times,
Claude code got the understanding wrong,
so it wasn't really a bug, security bug.
And so the person that was just like,
I cannot answer more of these,
no, that's not actually a problem.
Here's why.
And the incentives were misaligned, right?
Like with a PR, you're like, what is the incentive?
Maybe like, oh, I'm a contributor.
Well, this they were getting paid for.
So they were getting overwhelmed.
Anyway, link into that for all the people who care.
Yeah.
And finally.
I think Curl's one of those like maintained by one person apps.
Yeah.
It's got, if not one, it's a very small team.
Finally, the PSF JetBrains survey for 2026 is on.
Have you done this yet?
no
I have not either
it's that time of the year already
I know
yeah so anyway
it takes about 10 to 15 minutes to fill out
link into it
everyone go out there
fill this out
make your voice heard
please tell them that CSS is not a programming language
okay
and you all use my test
do not click no testing
do not test
exactly
the second most popular testing framework is none
yeah
Yeah.
Which is great because it used to be the number one.
Progress.
That's a form of progress.
All right.
Ready for a joke?
Yeah.
I don't even remember what I picked for this,
so it's going to be news to me as well.
This is fun.
Okay.
No, I don't care about that.
This is good.
So we've all heard of these license plates
that have crazy stuff has gone wrong.
Like there was a license plate.
The person put null for their license plate.
And instead of, because they thought that there would be a test,
like if not equal to null, then send ticket or whatever.
But instead it's like if value equals null,
and they started getting all the tickets.
So here's a car with a license plate that just says example.
And the title is when test values get pushed to production.
What state is that?
That's good.
What state are we looking at here?
Maryland.
Yeah, so if you're in Maryland, there's an example car out there.
You get slugged for that.
Yeah, that's pretty fun.
Do your kids do the yellow bug thing or the yellow car?
Oh, yeah, yeah, the punch bug sort of thing.
Well, because when we were kids, it was slug bug or punch bug.
Slug bug.
Yeah, slug bug, yeah.
So my kids do if it's a yellow car or if it's a license plate with a state that's not adjacent to your state.
or your own state.
So like, yeah, for us,
Washington wouldn't work,
but like Montana would sort of thing.
So I'm like, that's just,
you're just randomly picking things.
So I chose,
it's any car that's not black
or not a sedan,
which is, you know,
actually, no, I chose black car
and not a sedan,
which now is most cars.
So anyway.
Yeah, you're going to get tired from punching your kids.
My kid does that as well, and I feel like it's just an excuse to go around.
They don't hit you hard, but, you know, just being silly.
Just taps because, yeah, yeah.
Anyway, so also we did this once like two blocks away from a Stanley steamer,
which they're all yellow trucks,
and we were waiting in line somewhere where there was like,
we didn't know why, but like every five minutes,
a Stanley steamer truck was coming by,
And we're like, this is ridiculous.
It's crazy.
Before we wrap it up really quick, Christian, out of the honest,
gave us some interesting thoughts on the Apple,
on the iOS not open source intersection.
Apple apps must be only available through the Apple App Store,
which is interesting, right?
The ones that are for iOS, not for macOS.
Oh, Rick, even if you allow, yeah, weird.
Yeah, so that makes it difficult.
And says, GPL licensed software popular in open source
is often incompatible with App Store terms
because Apple requires control over binaries
and does not distribute the source code.
So, interesting.
Yeah.
Okay.
More to say on that in the not-too-distant future, actually.
Do you have more apps coming out?
I have stuff to share, but I can't share any more than that.
Okay.
Teaser.
I've had a better experience this time.
I'll just leave it at that.
Don't touch that dial.
Anytime you have to interact with these app stores,
you know, it's not the best.
Yeah.
All right.
Don't touch that dial for now.
Signing off though.
See you later, Brian.
Bye everyone.
Bye.